#summary ftransc Installation Instructions and Usage Tutorial

= What is ftransc =

ftransc is a script written in python for the Linux-based operating systems 
for converting audio files across various formats.

From version 4.1.0, there is a GUI front-end to ftransc which is called ftransc_qt. 

== ftransc Dependencies ==

The dependencies for ftransc are:
  * [http://code.google.com/p/mutagen mutagen] - for metadata handling
  * [http://www.ffmpeg.org ffmpeg] - for decoding all input multimedia files and encoding to  wma format.
  * [http://lame.sourceforge.net lame] - for encoding to mp3 format.
  * [http://flac.sourceforge.net flac] - for encoding to flac format.
  * [http://www.vorbis.com vorbis-tools] - for encoding to ogg format.
  * [http://www.audiocoding.com faac] - for encoding to aac format (with .m4a extension).
  * [http://www.musepack.net mppenc] - for encoding to musepack format (.mpc extension).
  * [http://www.riverbankcomputing.co.uk/software/pyqt/intro PyQt4] - for the GUI front-end, ftransc_qt.

== Installing ftransc == 

Install dependencies, including subversion, on Terminal using apt-get as follows.
{{{
    sudo apt-get install ffmpeg lame flac faac vorbis-tools python-mutagen mppenc subversion python-qt4
}}}

OPTION A. Obtain the latest released ftransc tarball version from [http://code.google.com/p/ftransc/downloads/list ftransc] website and unpack and install it as follows:
{{{
    tar xvzf ftransc-x.y.z.tar.gz
    cd ftransc-x.y.z
    sudo make uninstall
    sudo make install
}}}
OPTION B. Obtain the latest ftransc code from trunk using subversion as follows.
{{{
    cd /tmp
    svn export http://ftransc.googlecode.com/svn/trunk ftransc_tmp_dir
    cd ftransc_tmp_dir
    sudo make uninstall
    sudo make install
}}}
OPTION C. If you already have ftransc of version 4.0.5 or higher and intend to upgrade to the lastest available version in trunk, you can use the --upgrade option of ftransc as follows.
{{{
    sudo ftransc --upgrade
}}}

Now you should be able to run ftransc from terminal. You use ftransc to check if the dependencies it needs are installed or not as follows:
{{{
    ftransc --check
}}}

For further ftransc help:
{{{
    man ftransc
}}}

== How ftransc Works == 

ftransc should be invoked/run on Terminal, typically in a syntax like 
*ftransc options files*. ftransc will convert one file at a time and 
followed by the next one, until all input files are converted.

Conversion steps:

 # A lockfile corresponding to the input file is created, if it exists already, then the file is skipped because its already locked.
 # Then, the metadata tags are copied from the input file. Not all tags are copied, only *title*, *artist*, *album*, *genre*, *track number*, and album/song release *date/year* are copied. The character encoding used to handle metadata tags is UTF-8.
 # The input file is converted to the the desired audio format. The input file is not changed in any way. 
 # When the second step, above, has finised successfully, the metadata tags that were copied, if any, are then inserted into the newly created file.
 # A lockfile corresponding to the input file is deleted.
 # If an option to remove the original file is specified and if the conversion process has finished successfully, the original file is deleted.
 # Note: If step any of steps 2 to 4 has caused ftransc to terminate before reaching step 5, a lockfile will still exist. Further attempts to encode a file with a lockfile existing will cause that file to be skipped. To remove the lockfile use the '-u' option.

== ftransc Examples ==

Example 1 - converting from MP3 to OGG:
{{{
    ftransc -f ogg filename.mp3
}}}
The output file name for the above example will be 'filename.ogg'

Example 2 - converting from MP3 to AAC, removing original file on success, using high quality preset:
{{{
    ftransc -r -q extreme -f aac filename.mp3
}}}

Example 3 - extract audio content from a video files into the MP3 format, use best quality preset:
{{{
    ftransc -q insane -f mp3 filename1.flv filename2.avi filename3.mpg filename4.vob ...
}}}

Example 4 - convert all audio files inside a given folder into WMA format. (This option is not recursive to child-folders)
{{{
    ftransc -f wma --directory /path/to/folder_name
}}}

Example 5 - convert all audio audio files (and extract all audio content from video files) inside a given folder recursively including all sub-/child-folders, ftransc should be used with the 'find' command in the pipeline as follows:
{{{
    find /path/to/folder_name -type f -print0 | xargs -0 ftransc -f aac -q high
}}}
